<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Endnotes</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter">
<section id="endnotes" epub:type="endnotes">
 <h2 epub:type="title">Endnotes</h2>
 <ol>
 <li id="note-1" epub:type="endnote"> 
 <p>The mark of Hindu wifehood and the symbol of all the devotion that it implies.<a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
 </li>
 <li id="note-2" epub:type="endnote">
 <p>The <i xml:lang="bn">sari</i> is the dress of the Hindu woman.<a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p> 
 </li>
 <li id="note-3" epub:type="endnote">
			<p>Taking the dust of the feet is a formal offering of reverence and is done by lightly touching the feet of the revered one and then one’s own head with the same hand. The wife does not ordinarily do this to the husband.<a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-3" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
 </li>
 <li id="note-4" epub:type="endnote">
			<p>It would not be reckoned good form for the husband to be continually going into the zenana, except at particular hours for meals or rest.<a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-4" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
 </li>
 <li id="note-5" epub:type="endnote">
			<p><i xml:lang="bn">Bara</i> = Senior; <i xml:lang="bn">Chota</i>= Junior. In joint families of rank, though the widows remain entitled only to a life-interest in their husbands’ share, their rank remains to them according to seniority, and the titles “Senior” and “Junior” continue to distinguish the elder and younger branches, even though the junior branch be the one in power.<a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-5" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
 </li>
 <li id="note-6" epub:type="endnote">
			<p>The seclusion of the zenana, and all the customs peculiar to it, are designated by the general term “Purdah”, which means Screen.<a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-6" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
 </li>
 <li id="note-7" epub:type="endnote">
			<p>The prestige of the daughter-in-law is of the first importance in a Hindu household of rank [Trans.].<a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-7" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
 </li>
 <li id="note-8" epub:type="endnote">
			<p>The Nationalist movement, which began more as an economic than a political one, having as its main object the encouragement of indigenous industries [Trans.].<a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-8" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
 </li>
 <li id="note-9" epub:type="endnote">
			<p>“Babu” is a term of respect, like “Father” or “Mister,” but has also meant in colonial days a person who understands some English. [on-line ed.]<a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-9" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
 </li>
 <li id="note-10" epub:type="endnote">
			<p>Lit.: “Hail Mother”; the opening words of a song by Bankim Chatterjee, the famous Bengali novelist. The song has now become the national anthem, and <i xml:lang="bn">Bande Mataram</i>> the national cry, since the days of the <i xml:lang="bn">Swadeshi</i> movement [Trans.].<a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-10" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
 </li>
 <li id="note-11" epub:type="endnote">
 <p>The Jupiter Pluvius of Hindu mythology.<a href="chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-11" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p> 
 </li>
 <li id="note-12" epub:type="endnote">
 <p>Bimala. the younger brother’s wife, was the <i xml:lang="bn">Chota</i> or Junior Rani.<a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-12" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p> 
 </li>
 <li id="note-13" epub:type="endnote">
 <p>According to the Hindu calendar [Trans.].<a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-13" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p> 
 </li>
 <li id="note-14" epub:type="endnote">
 <p>The son-in-law is the pet of a Hindu household.<a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-14" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p> 
 </li>
 <li id="note-15" epub:type="endnote">
 <p>A Vaishnava poet (Sanskrit) whose lyrics of the adoration of the Divinity serve as well to express all shades of human passion [Trans.].<a href="chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-15" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p> 
 </li>
 <li id="note-16" epub:type="endnote">
 <p>When a relationship is established by marriage, or by mutual understanding arising out of special friendship or affection, the persons so related call each other in terms of such relationship, and not by name. [Trans.].<a href="chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-16" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p> 
 </li>
 <li id="note-17" epub:type="endnote">
 <p>The name by which Buddha was known when a Prince, before renouncing the world.<a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-17" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p> 
 </li>
 <li id="note-18" epub:type="endnote">
 <p>The condition of the curse which had reduced them to ashes was such that they could only be restored to life if the stream of the Ganges was brought down to them. [Trans.].<a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-18" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p> 
 </li>
 <li id="note-19" epub:type="endnote">
 <p>Sakuntala, after the king, her lover, went back to his kingdom, promising to send for her, was so lost in thoughts of him, that she failed to hear the call of her hermit guest who thereupon cursed her, saying that the object of her love would forget all about her. [Trans.].<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-19" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p> 
 </li>
 <li id="note-20" epub:type="endnote">
 <p>A line from Bankim Chatterjee’s national song <i xml:lang="bn">Bande Mataram</i>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-20" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p> 
 </li>
 <li id="note-21" epub:type="endnote">
 <p>A quotation from the Upanishads.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-21" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p> 
 </li>
 <li id="note-22" epub:type="endnote">
 <p>There is a world of sentiment attached to the ornaments worn by women in Bengal. They are not merely indicative of the love and regard of the giver, but the wearing of them symbolizes all that is held best in wifehood⁠—the constant solicitude for her husband’s welfare, the successful performance of the material and spiritual duties of the household entrusted to her care. When the husband dies, and the responsibility for the household changes hands, then are all ornaments cast aside as a sign of the widow’s renunciation of worldly concerns. At any other time the giving up of omaments is always a sign of supreme distress and as such appeals acutely to the sense of chivalry of any Bengali who may happen to witness it [Trans.].<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-22" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p> 
 </li>
 <li id="note-23" epub:type="endnote">
	<p>The cashier is the official who is most in touch with the ladies of a <i xml:lang="bn">zamindar’s</i> household, directly taking their requisitions for household stores and doing their shopping for them, and so he becomes more a member of the family than the others. [Trans.].<a href="chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-23" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p> 
	</li>
	<li id="note-24" epub:type="endnote">
		<p>The daughter of the house occupies a place of specially tender affection in a Bengali household (perhaps in Hindu households all over India) because, by dictate of custom, she must be given away in marriage so early. She thus takes corresponding memories with her to her husband’s home, where she has to begin as a stranger before she can get into her place. The resulting feeling, of the mistress of her new home for the one she has left, has taken ceremonial form as the Brothers’ Day, on which the brothers are invited to the married sisters’ houses. Where the sister is the elder, she offers her blessing and receives the brother’s reverence, and vice versa. Presents, called the offerings of reverence (or blessing), are exchanged. [Trans.].<a href="chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-24" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p> 
	</li>
	<li id="note-25" epub:type="endnote">
		<p>Of the <i xml:lang="bn">Ramayana</i>. The story of his devotion to his elder brother Rama and his brother’s wife Sita, has become a byword.<a href="chapter-9.xhtml#noteref-25" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p> 
	</li>
	<li id="note-26" epub:type="endnote">
		<p>Food consecrated by the touch of a revered person.<a href="chapter-10.xhtml#noteref-26" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p> 
	</li>
	<li id="note-27" epub:type="endnote">
		<p>Quotation from the National song⁠—<i xml:lang="bn">Bande Mataram</i>.<a href="chapter-11.xhtml#noteref-27" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p> 
	</li>
	<li id="note-28" epub:type="endnote">
		<p>Rudra, the Terrible, a name of Shiva. [Trans.].<a href="chapter-11.xhtml#noteref-28" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
	</li>
	<li id="note-29" epub:type="endnote">
		<p>Any dainties to be offered ceremonially should be made by the lady of the house herself. [Trans.].<a href="chapter-11.xhtml#noteref-29" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
	</li>
	<li id="note-30" epub:type="endnote">
		<p>Sitting on the bare floor is a sign of mourning, and so, by association of ideas, of an abject attitude of mind. [Trans.].<a href="chapter-12.xhtml#noteref-30" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
	</li>
 </ol>

</section>
</body>

<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3" id="noteref-3" epub:type="noteref">3</a>
